And so, here we were, in the middle of the 60s, with the hunger, famine, problems in Pakistan and Inka.
And by then we had had several years of testing on farms.
The first year we brought in 350 tons of improved varieties, together with the management that we have learned how to fertilize on the different Pakistani soils, 300 tons into India.
Despite the war between the two countries, everything went wrong.
And I think that's in the record of all the problems.
By 67, 68, you could see things were happening.
Then it was a question of pushing the political leaders to get the right support from the standpoint of importations of fertilizer, credit for the little farmer to buy it, and the price announced before planting so that the government would buy anything offered at that pre-announced price, which would reflect the international market price.
And that's how these organizations developed then?
And so this started taking off.
By 68, no one except Paddock and Ehrlich and some of these were saying it was still favorable weather that had changed.
It wasn't technology.
By 69, it repeated.
By 69, there was euphoria in both countries, Pakistan, India.
Pakistan really became self-sufficient essentially in 68, India.
And then Pakistan went back because of internal strife, political upheavals.
But it didn't go back as much as one would have expected with all the chaos.
Whereas India kept moving.
And so the Peace Prize was awarded.
And I remember when I came back from Maslow at a press conference in New York.
that was sponsored jointly by Rockefeller Foundation, Ford Foundation, USAID.
And present, as I recall, representing those people, or those organizations, was Dr. J.G.
Herrard, Dr. F.F.
Hill of the Ford Foundation, and Dr. John Hanna, who was then the ex-president of Michigan State University, but was then the head of USAID.
And each of them spoke at this press conference about what this meant, this so-called Green Revolution had captured it, become a cliché.
We had nothing to do with it.
The origin of this term went back to the report, I'm not sure if it was 1967 or 68, I believe 1968, of the
then director of USAID, William Dowd.
When I talked about John Hanna being the director, he had been director of USAID.
And he had used the term in describing the sudden increase in wheat production in Pakistan and India.
It seemed like a green revolution was starting.
And he said something seems to be happening with rice in the same way in the Philippines.
And it now looks like it might be starting to happen in Pakistan.
So a Green Revolution is starting, and this became the cliché.
We never had anything to do with it.
So at this press conference, each of these three people spoke with N.I.
and spoke with great fame.
By then I was pretty confident.
what was going to happen, even in a place like India.
We had similar programs going well in Turkey by then and a number of other countries.
Argentina was moving along very well.
Of course, it was never under duress from the standpoint of food shortage,
My interest in working there was that looking at the world food situation, I figured that it would be an exporter to other parts of Latin America, especially that would be food shortage by this time, 1985 or 1990.
After these three distinguished people had spoken, I spoke briefly,
how this had evolved in maybe 10 minutes or 15 minutes.
And, of course, these other three people had given their insights into it.
And it was opened up to questions.
And this was, it was a pretty big pressure meeting at the time of life.
The first question I got was, well, how much is, I don't remember the exact wordage, but the essence was, how much is this bone-dogling cost the American taxpayers, either directly or indirectly, by way of these foundations in the USAID?
And I said, well, the budget
For the Rice Institute, for Semen, and for the two that are now building, Zia in Colombia and Iita in Nigeria, last year was the equivalent of three Phantom Jet fighters.
That was the end of that.
Then it was just like I couldn't do any wrong.
And then there was a lot of other questions, but none of them of that kind.
And by the next September, the World Bank called a meeting in Washington, D.C.
with the proposal to set up the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research.
And all organizations, governments, institutions that were interested were invited to attend.
I don't remember how many was there, I talked briefly.
But mostly the directors of the institute.
And this is 1971 now?
This was 1971, probably in September.
And there, the directors, Chandler from the Rice Institute, Wellhausen from Sima, I guess Grant was, yeah, Grant from Seattle, Columbia, and who was that?
IITA wasn't operating yet, but was being built.
Whoever the acting director was, they all spoke, giving a description of their budgets, the projects they had, and so on.
In the end, they decided to form this consultant group in international agriculture.
The secretariat was placed in the World Bank.
with Mother's support at that time from them.
There was quite a sizable... Well, first of all... Well, what was the aim?
I mean... ...to pool the resources.
Okay, that's what I thought.
To pool the resources to support not only the research institutes that were then either operating, there were only two operating.
Yeah.
The Rice Institute, similar.
And two of building.
Mm-hmm.
Sea optical...
Center for Tropical Agriculture in Columbia and the one for Tropical Agriculture in Nigeria.
But there were plans for others.
And so... And the World Bank was going to help fund it?
It was exploring the possibility, but also as a participant, a funder.
The result was that... And Robert McNamara was the director of the World Bank at that time.
I guess that's right.
I forgot the sequence, but I'm sure he was.
And the first commitment, that is, the three foundations continue to be elaborated.
But USAID said, we will put in a quarter of the total budget,
And it's still in existence, and they wish they hadn't put it on a percentage basis.
Because that means they don't have much funds for other things.
And there are a lot of other good opportunities.
Other governments begin to join.
The World Bank became a sizable contributor.
I think the total budget was $184 million for the 13 institutes that were then in operation.
USAID was the biggest single contributor, 25%.
By that time, 1985, the foundations were only sort of
very modest contributors because these budgets had grown so big that they were in mobilization duties.
But there were about thirty, thirty, the way I remember it, thirty-six or seven, thirty-eight governments who contributed funds to this pool of resources.
There were a bank included, the United Nations Development Program.
The regional development banks like BID, the regional development bank for Latin America, the same for Southeast Asia,
I guess that pretty much covers it.
And are these 13 international institutes then in any sort of a formal arrangement or organization besides just consulting?
Each of those institutes has its own board of directors.
And they're international and background nationality.
Their scientists are also
international from the standpoint of nationality.
They have a prescribed area of research.
Erie is only on rice.
Simmon is in maize, corn, wheat.
Originally we had a small barley program for food, not for beer.
The barley has been transferred to the Dryer Area Research Center in Aleppo, Syria, just a year or so ago.
Ten of those are on plants, species, crops.
Two on animals.
One on developing controls for diseases.
International Livestock Research, I know it's in Ethiopia, on animal diseases.
There are a whole series of diseases.
animals that are potential enemies of domestic livestock in Africa.
They're in the wild reservoir of wild game.
Included, of course, is trypanosomiasis, sleeping sickness, and a lot of other diseases.
And so they're working on that problem.
Then there's animal production program
in Ethiopia, but it's had problems because of the political instabilities there.
So there are two in animals, ten in crops and one in economic policy.
And where's that one?
That one is located in Washington, D.C.
because of availability of library facilities, computer things so that they... It'd have to be in a big research.
It'd have to be in a place where you don't have the isolation like we have in most of the other.
Yeah.
And what's that one?
And the World Bank is there and many of the international... What's that one called?
Let's see.
That's...
International Food Policy Research Institute, if free.
Now... Now, are they in some sort of an umbrella arrangement?
Or, I mean, is there a formal structure?
Every year they have what's called the... Well, they go through this process.
The individual boards of trustees of the institutes have their own meeting.
through which the director of the institute presents the proposal of the budget for the next year with the general plan of work, not the details, but where the money is going to be spent.
This is not only in research, but in training, fellowships, or could be plans for physical plant improvement.
And then,
This is approved or modified by the trustees of that individual institute.
Revised, I shall say.
Then in September, this is done for each individual institute.
Then they come together in Center's Week, a week-long meeting in Washington, D.C., where each of the institutes presents orally and with the visuals.
their plan of work in a general way, their accomplishments first.
Where they are in their research program.
What they've done in a year.
What they've done in a year, or over the last several.
What they want to do.
And the monies that are required to do this.
Each institute does it independently.
All of the donor agencies are there.
It's open to the public.
And generally, they have to prune back.
And they try to cut back so that all of the institutes will have to bear their share of the cut.
Depending on the monies that are pledged, there have to be minor adjustments later.
And, of course, one of the disturbing influences is the rates of inflation, which is not the same in all countries.
Exactly.
So it gets pretty complicated.
I can imagine.
I can imagine dealing with the peso, how complicated it would get.
You'd have to re-figure every week.
You know, for example, let's see what it figures out.
If you considered, how much does it take of increased food production to pay for that hundred, what did I say?
184 million dollar budget for the global budget.
184 million.
There, you're good at this.
184 million, let's say, yeah, just for rough figuring, let's say, we'll call it wheat, $130 a ton.
184.
184 million.
Tons.
Wait a minute.
Dollars.
Okay.
And if each ton of wheat is worth 130, take... So we're dividing 130 into 184 million dollars?
Is that what we want to do?
I guess so.
Let's see how it comes out.
Big stack.
Well, if it were 100, it'd be 130 million.
Yeah.
I mean, it'd be, yeah, it was $100.
So it's 130 to about one in the third million.
Yeah, right, that's about it.
One in the third, yeah.
And you see, last year's increased wheat production in India, for example,
compared to the base period that we used.
The average wheat production in India before the advent of the new technology, an average for 1960 to 66 was 11 million tons.
Last year it was 46 million tons.
So 46 from 11, that's 35 million tons more last year's harvest over the base period.
This is not a very big part.
That's for the total effect all around the world on all crops.
I used an analogy of just the impact of new technology in wheat production in India.
Now that's not net because this includes the other costs, but nonetheless gives you an insight into
economic impact that has come from this.
Let's go back to the organization.
And that increased production, for example, of 46 million compared to the base of 11, or in other words, that 35 million additional tons fed
They provided about 65% of the calories and protein for an additional 250 million people just in India, just the one crop, without considering what's happened in rice and other crops.
Now, all of that didn't come just from the institute.
This is a composite effect of agricultural research and its application.
from many sources.
But the institutes, the international institutes, I think we can say were catalysts.
And also in many cases, the generators of the basic information and materials that when put into operation commercially resulted in these changes.
And, okay, let's go back now to the early 1970s.
At that time, was there
I know that they all meet once a year.
They all discuss this for funding and where they've been.
But at that time, was there sort of an umbrella type organization formed?
In 71.
And what's the name of that?
CGIAR, Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research.
Okay.
CGIAR, okay.
CGIAR.
And is that in Washington, D.C.?
It's in Washington, D.C.
The Secretariat is in the World Bank.
Okay, okay.
And it's through that that the information from each one of the individual research institutes is disseminated to the others?
No, they disseminate.
Each one has their own office of publication.
They disseminate their own.
They're pretty much autonomous.
Okay.
Now, let's move this up to date with how these institutes, we've already seen how these institutes would deal with an issue like wheat production, dealing with your life.
Now, let's take an issue, a contemporary issue, Africa and starvation in Africa.
Let's just go through a scenario of how they would help bring about ending the starvation problem in Africa.
Well, this is in part why I made that trip to Africa last week.
It's my contention.
that the institutes today are not like the institutes when they were first formed.
Because at that time, or the pre-international institutes, the old Rock Color Forward programs, had at least the wheat program always measured itself by how much additional food was produced.
In other words, it didn't stop with doing the research.
It didn't stop with breeding the variety.
or incorporating the disease resistance.
It didn't stop with running a fertilizer test to know which kind of fertilizer and how much, or how to control this weed, or how to do this, but how at the right time you transferred that technology to the farm.
And it was done, for example, Mexico essentially became
self-sufficient and weak production before there was an extension service.
It wasn't there when we arrived.
The extension service was established in 1955 by transplanting about 25 of our best young scientists that had been trained in research.
to form the beginning of an extension circle.
But Mexico became self-sufficient in wheat production in 56.
In other words, before they got their feet on the ground.
The reason being that when there was no vehicle, we ourselves had to get out onto the farms and that on-farm testing became also an on-farm demonstration and we
Some of us in the early times knew that we could never get this technology pulled off unless we talked to the right policy makers about pricing, about fertilizer.
We had to assume this responsibility or nothing would have happened.
But today, these institutions are much more sophisticated.
Of course, there's a lot more trained people scattered around the world.
with the exception of the African countries, which are now kind of like it was when we started Mexico way back there in the early 40s.
But I'm fearful also that there's a lot of, after looking at this African situation and reading their publications, that there's a lot of information that's useful and plant materials that are available.
that need to be transferred to the farms to produce more food.
It's not moving off the experiment stations.
So in other words, you think that there's enough information to resolve the African crisis?
Not all of them, but to make a big start.
And since research is continuous, if your extension service is utilizing the best that's available and getting it out there,
The research is back behind and linked together, and somebody is worrying about policy, how to get this all integrated.
Did we talk about my philosophy about integration?
Well, go ahead, tell it to me.
I'll give you a couple of sheets here someplace if I can lay hands on it, but here's what it is.
I have found from personal experience that no matter how excellent the research in one particular discipline of agricultural science, whether it be the plant breeding, varietal improvement, whether it be the work on soil fertility, how to restore soil fertility, whether it be the control of weeds, whether it be conservation of moisture or proper irrigation practices, whether it be control of diseases or insects,
As long as those are used in isolation, they have very little impact.
Somebody has to go the extra mile to put them all together.
And I saw this very early, as early as 1949, that if we were going to do something to affect production, I had to become involved in all of this.
In the beginning, I was probably rather weak in the whole area of soil fertility.
I had taken some courses, but the first year I worked with Bill Caldwell, who was our first soil scientist in the Mexican rock fellow program, but he left a year later.
So we carried on the best we could, continuing to work with fertilizers and soil fertility and agronomic practices, in addition to the breeding work that I personally was responsible for and the disease work on wheat.
Then we got another soil scientist and he stayed only a short time and left.
We got a third one and then he branched out into working on other crops and never stayed at it.
So in the first eight years, we had eight agronomist soil scientists, no continuity, but we kept going despite that ourselves out on the farm.
And so by the time this had all unfolded, we knew pretty much what had to be done.
I could see that
We were never going to get anyplace as early as 1948 with all of the maneuvering that was going on by the flour millers.
The weeds that were grown in the central part of Mexico at that time were mixtures of very, many of them were badly mixed fields, very old weeds of nondescript growers, probably some of them dating back to Spanish colonial times.
And I saw that despite the fact that Mexico was importing roughly 50% of its wheat consumption, that at time of harvest, and everything was done in a primitive way, at that time the sickle and the log was shredded out with animals like you see in parts of Asia and Africa today.
the farmer couldn't sell his grain, or he'd have to sell it at half the price.
Generally, at time of harvest, he couldn't sell it.
And the reason was that the milling companies would import, prefer to import wheat, more uniform, better quality.
But then I saw that after two or three months after harvest,
And then these mills would come and buy this for half the price they were paying for imported wheat.
And I told Parar, our director, when I saw what was going on, a year before we started to multiply our first improved variety, I said, Dutch, we're never going to get any price unless we stop this racket.
Yeah.
we've got to make sure that that farmer is going to get paid a fair price for his crop.
And I think it can be handled easily.
Which is the issue of integration.
Sure.
And he said, we'll go see the minister or the sub-secretary handle most of those things.
Engineer Gonzales Gallardo.
We told him, look, this is happening.
These abuses.
The farmer is being paid half of what he's due.
Yeah.
easily solved if you don't issue any permits until they've bought all of that grain and bought it at more or less the world price.
He's multiplied.
He sat there and thought of it and he says, it doesn't look very complicated.
We'll do it.
That's the way you learn in the battle of needs and politics.
about moving the whole package together, the economic part, the policy, as it relates to economic policy.
Well, relate that to the organizations that we were talking about, or the institutes, and integration into Africa today.
There is where these institutes are not doing this at this time.
Not moving it out onto the land.
So that's the difference between 20 years ago and now.
That's your opinion, right?
My opinion is that too many, now there are exceptions, too many of the scientists at the present time in those institutes come from affluent nations.
or they might be scientists from a developing nation who studied in the affluent nations, see that you do the research and it's automatically applied.
They forget that our farmers
and livestock people are highly educated people.
They come to the experiment stations and the laboratories and they're waiting for whatever new development.
The private sector has, whether it's feed or fertilizer or weed killers or insecticides, they're out there promoting it.
Not so in Africa.
It's moving.
It's not that way in Africa.
In Africa, you've got to do what we did in the wheat program in Mexico.
Unfortunately, the corn program never did it under the same roof.
The impact of the corn program, which is budget-wise, has spent twice as much money as the wheat program from the beginning of the Rockefeller program.
has yet to make its impact.
And there are many reasons.
Lack of continuity.
In the same period when I was the director of the Wheaton Research and Production Program, those 40 years, 39, whatever it was, that's not just rock tunnel, the continuity into cinema.
I was the only director.
Whereas Bourne had eight
And every time you get a new director, they change the direction, new ways.
And then the young people get disoriented and disillusioned.
They say, what in the hell is going on here?
They're going in a different direction and they throw in the sponge and they go and look for a job someplace else.
There's a whole series of things.
that continuity provides.
And it doesn't have to be a heavy fist in continuity.
And I never asked any young scientist to do something that I wasn't willing to do myself.
And I think this was a good part of the reason that we had a very harmonious group of scientists.
Now you said that there were two of these international institutes in Ethiopia,
Is that right?
No.
The animal one for diseases is in Kenya.
Okay.
The one on animal production is in Ethiopia.
And what are those institutes doing to help solve this problem in Africa?
Well, there are other... The animal sciences, I should point out, also, were started much later.
Yeah.
But EITA, the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture in Nigeria,
was the one, two, three, fourth institute to be founded.
And it works on tropical crops included in Krasava, root crops, cowpeas, a number of these kinds of tropical crops.
It also is linked to the cement and does some work on corn.
I can link to Icarusac Institute in South India that works on Assura.
But up to now, there's been no major impact out of any of those three.
None?
You can measure in tonnage of food.
That's clearly definable to that.
The truth is that of the institutes now in operation,
The ones that have made the contributions up to now.
Semen, largely because of wheat, but in some minor way in corn.
Eerie in rice.
And the Potato Institute in some countries.
And now Sorghum is coming on pretty good.
And I think this is... And where are the Potato and the Sorghum Institutes?
The Potato Institute is in Peru.
The Sorghum Institute, it's sorghum, chickpea, peanuts, millet.
It's located in Hyderabad, India.
They're working with substations in Africa.
But you see, this stuff's got to move.
Oh, absolutely.
But my own opinion is, this is a very personal point of view, but I think that they tried to expand the number of these institutes too fast.
They should have, wherever you had the right mix of all people that had been through the wars with only modest equipment, they had to use quite a bit of it between the ears.
They got things done not only on the experiment station, but basically.
Because they had the technical and bureaucratic know-how to get things done.
Right.
And they weren't satisfied with just doing the research.
Application.
They were measured.
We had some philosophical discussions very early, the difference between corn and wheat program in Mexico.
And I got particular hell once a year from Herrera, the president by then of the Raunfella Foundation.
Well, I started getting the static when he was director of all of their agricultural programs, agricultural sciences, before he became the president.
But each year when we turn in our annual report, which I did religiously, and I thought I wrote a pretty good report.
They were not lengthy, but they all went into one condensed RF report.
And invariably he'd say, where the hell are your publications?
And once in a while I'd go to a game, but very seldom.
I'd go to a very few big science meetings and I figured they were a waste of time.
And there's so much other things to be done.
And the same way, I said, I guess I've been on vacation really for 10 years.
I'm not advocating that for other people, but that's, hell, I'm always behind the way it is.
And meanwhile, the corn people started a whole series of beautiful publications on the evolution of corn.
going back to all of the old types that they collected and how they evolved.
They worked with Paul Mangelsdorf, who was one of our first consultants.
Now, what type of publications are you talking about publications like this?
I mean, was he talking about your own personal scientific publications and scientific journals?
Yes.
And these were very fancy ones.
And it's pretty esoteric and knobs on the chromosomes and how did they get there from which wild grass were they interdressed and all of these sorts of things.
But it had not a damn thing to do with producing more corn.
And a lot of effort went into this.
And he'd say, where are yours, my daddy?
Hell, you're ruining your own reputation if you don't publish it.
Andy said, moreover, you don't get the information out about what's going on.
I said, you know, there are several ways of getting information out.
All of these young people that come to work here, they know what's going on.
That's one way of disseminating.
And when I have a farmer's field day, or when I give a series of conferences around Mexico directed at the farmer in the next years of production, originally it used to be pretty miserable.
but we got the enthusiasm going with farmer's field days.
I think I told you about the first ones, and I got 25, and then in a few years there were thousands.
You get the radio people involved, you get a lot of publicity, but it didn't show in official publications.
But in 1956, when I got this same song and dance when I turned in my annual report,
I said, what about your publication?
I said, all right.
Mexico is self-sufficient in wheat production.
What the hell did we come down here for?
To write learned publications or to grow more wheat and fill empty bellies?
That's the last time I ever heard anything about that.
But corn has publications.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
and not a hell of a lot more to show for them compared to what they should have.
Corn, the important role that it has in developing countries of Latin America and in Africa should be way out front.
And this doesn't mean that they haven't had good scientists.
I'll bet if those eight corn directors, six of them were damn sight better scientists than I was.
But they never...
stayed long enough, or they were more interested in the theoretical, didn't have any real drive to put the information into, to integrate it and put it into production.
And they didn't know how to handle political leaders to get the right policies, economic policies.
You know, if you're going to move production,
You better know when to keep a low profile and talk in a quiet voice and when to change and become aggressive in order to win the point that's necessary to hit the shore on the road.
That may sound very crude, but... That's what you said in this publication.
This one.
On how to deal with African problems.
Well, that's where we are right now.
There's a couple of sheets.
Let me see.
If you turn that off just a second, I'll see if she's got it.
We're still talking about integration.
Okay, let's continue.
We need... We need the best specialist in all of the fields of science that affect agriculture and food production, and for that matter, also utilization.
But we need a few that are also integrators, that can put all of the pieces of the jigsaw puzzle together, and that are comfortable in trying to do so, despite the fact that there are many headaches and problems all along the way.
If you stay in the shade and comfort of your own tree, your own specialty, it's comfortable.
But that will never produce a successful management of that forest because the forests are made up of the shadows of many trees and even many different species of trees.
And there are gray areas between the shadows of each tree or each specialty which you must venture into if you're going to manage that forest.
with all of its complexities and interactions, for the production of the maximum amount of lumber, of fuel, for the indirect values of habitat for wildlife, for outdoor recreation, for watershed protection, for all of these.
And so it is in integrating all of these disciplines that go into first the production,
of food, not just the biological package and the soil package, but the economic policies, the credit, and the storage transform, and finally the utilization.
Exactly the things that you did in Mexico.
You've got to put them all together.
Nothing happened.
And that's exactly what we need in Africa, according to that article that you wrote, or that, you know, according to this right here.
Yeah, that's exactly what it means.
And that's why I'm so damn frustrated now.
I've got the people that can do it.
And the data's there.
But whether I can get the organizational structure right.
And if I can't, I'll wash my hands up.
I don't want to be associated with wasting $2.5 million right now available for this year.
I don't want to be guilty of wasting that money that I have no control over.
I don't want to have the control that it's the mechanics of handling the budget and all of this.
I don't want a damn thing to do with that.
But on the other hand... But on the other hand, you have to be the counsel to direct that spending of that money.
And to see that it's spent properly for the right things to support the program, to contract the right people.
And if I don't, if I'm not convinced that that's being done, I can't play.
I won't play.
Because the money will be wasted.
Be wasted.
Yep.
Not that it'll be done maliciously.
No.
It'll be done because they don't have the know-how.
Exactly.
That's a good place to end.